>> Ifill: A RARE GLIMPSE BEHIND
THE FRONT LINES WITH THE ISLAMIC
STATE IN IRAQ AND SYRIA.
ONE WESTERNER WHO GAINED ACCESS
TO THE EXTREMIST GROUP TELLS US
WHAT HE SAW.
GOOD EVENING, I'M GWEN IFILL.
JUDY WOODRUFF IS AWAY.
ALSO AHEAD THIS CHRISTMAS EVE:
TIS THE SEASON FOR SIBLING SPATS
AND POLITICAL CLASHES.
HOW TO NAVIGATE THE TRICKY
TERRITORY OF FAMILY TIME, AND
STAY SESS-TRFREE FOR THE
HOLIDAYS.
>> WE JUST DON'T DISCUSS IT.
I'M WITHIN ONE END AND MY
BROTHER'S ON THE OTHER END,
AND WE JUST DO NOT DISCUSS
IT, PERIOD.
>> JUST REMEMBER THEY'RE
YOUR FAMILY.
YOU DON'T HAVE TO AGREE WITH
THEM.
>> Ifill: PLUS, CAN REPLACING
CLASSROOMS AND LECTURES WITH
VIDEO CHAT SEMINARS CREATE A
MORE ENGAGED LEARNING
ENVIRONMENT?
HOW ONE SAN FRANCISCO STARTUP IS
BREAKING DOWN THE WALLS OF
HIGHER EDUCATION.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE STORIES
WE'RE COVERING ON TONIGHT'S PBS
NEWSHOUR.
BATTLEFIELDS, CHRIIANSST AND
OTHERS MADE READY TODAY FOR THE
COMING OF CHRISTMAS.
IN BETHLEHEM, THOUSANDS OF THE
FAITHFUL, ALONG WITH TOURISTS,
CROWDED MANGER SQUARE,
TRADITIONAL BIRTHPLACE OF JESUS,
IN ADVANCE OF MIDNIGHT MASS.
AT THE VATICAN, POPE FRANCIS LED
MIDNIGHT SERVICES BEFORE THRONGS
OF WORSHIPPERS IN ST. PETER'S
BASILICA.
AND IN AFGHANISTAN, AMERICAN
TROOPS MARKED THE DAY WITH HYMNS
AND PRAYERS.
>> THERE IS SADNESS, I MISS THEM
BUT THEY ALSO KNOW THAT WE SERVE
WONDERFUL MISSION WITH THE
AFGHANISTAN PEOPLE.
WE WANT TO SERVE THEM AND
SUPPORT THEM AND THEY KNOW I AM
HERE DOING A GOOD THING AND SO
ITS WORTH IT.
>> Ifill: HERE AT HOME, WEATHER
MADE FOR SOME HOLIDAY TRAVEL
HEADACHES.
HEAVY RAIN AND HIGH WINDS IN THE
NORTHEAST, PLUS A WINTRY MIX IN
CHICAGO, CANCELED ABOUT 500
FLIGHTS NATIONWIDE.
MEANWHILE, POWER COMPANIES
RESTORED ELECTRICITY TO
THOUSANDS IN MISSISSIPPI.
DEADLY STORMS, BELIEVED TO BE
TORNADOES, RIPPED THROUGH THE
STATE LATE YESTERDAY, KILLING
FOUR PEOPLE.
TWO MAJOR SHIPPERS HAVE MOVED TO
MAKE SURE THERE'S NO MASS DELAY
OF CHRISTMAS DELIVERIES.
"THE WALL STREET JOURNAL" AND
OTHERS REPORTED TODAY THAT
U.P.S. AND FEDERAL EXPRESS HAVE
CAPPED AIR EXPRESS SHIPMENTS
FROM BIG RETAILERS.
LAST YEAR, AN 11TH-HOUR SURGE OF
ON-LINE ORDERS OVERWHELMED THE
SYSTEM, AND TWO MILLION PACKAGES
FAILED TO MAKE IT IN TIME.
AUTHORITIES IN BERKELEY,
MISSOURI, NEAR FERGUSON, CALLED
FOR CALM TODAY, AFTER A WHITE
POLICEMAN KILLED A BLACK
TEENAGER LAST NIGHT.
POLICE SAY 18-YEAR-OLD ANTONIO
MARTIN PULLED A GUN AS HE WAS
BEING QUESTIONED ABOUT A THEFT
WHEN HE PULLED A GUN, AND THE
OFFICER SHOT HIM THREE TIMES.
NEW PROTESTS QUICKLY STARTED,
FOLLOWED BY CLASHES WITH POLICE.
CROWDS CONTINUED TO GATHER, BUT
THE LOCAL MAYOR WARNED AGAINST
JUMPING TO CONCLUSIONS.
>> WHAT I SAW IN THIS INCIDENT
IS NOT WHAT PEOPLE PORTRAY, THIS
IS NOT A POLICEMAN IN THE CITY
OF BERKELEY HALF-COCKED, GOING
OUT.
YOU COULDN'T EVEN COMPARE THIS
WITH FERGUSON OR THE GARNER CASE
IN NEW YORK.
>> Ifill: THE POLICE SAID THE
OFFICER WAS NOT WEARING HIS BODY
CAMERA, AND HIS CAR'S DASHBOARD
CAMERA DID NOT ACTIVATE BECAUSE
ITS EMERGENCY LIGHTS WERE OFF.
SECURITY CAMERA VIDEO DID NOT
CLEARLY SHOW THE OBJECT IN
MARTIN'S HAND.
IN IRAQ, A SUICIDE BOMBER
ATTACKED A SUNNI GROUP FIGHTING
ISLAMIC STATE FORCES TODAY,
KILLING AT LEAST 24 PEOPLE AND
WOUNDING 55.
IT HAPPENED AT A MILITARY BASE
IN A TOWN JUST SOUTH OF BAGHDAD.
MOST OF THE DEAD WERE SUNNI
MILITIAMEN, THE REST WERE IRAQI
EBOLA DEAS INTH THREE WEST
AFRICAN NATIONS ARE NEARING
7,600.
THE WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION
ANNOUNCED TODAY THERE HAVE BEEN
7,573 CONFIRMED DEATHS IN
GUINEA, LIBERIA AND SIERRA
LEONE.
THAT'S OUT OF MORE THAN 19,000
CONFIRMED CASES ACROSS THE THREE
NATIONS.
OFFICIALS HAVE SAID THE ACTUAL
NUMBERS MAY BE FAR HIGHER.
FORMER PRESIDENT GEORGE H.W.
BUSH SPENT THE DAY AT A HOUSTON
HOSPITAL.
THE 41ST PRESIDENT WAS ADMITTED
TUESDAY AS A PRECAUTION AFTER HE
HAD TROUBLE BREATHING.
MR. BUSH IS 90 AND SUFFERS FROM
A FORM OF PARKINSON'S DISEASE.
TWO YEARS AGO, HE WAS
HOSPITALIZED NEARLY TWO MONTHS
WITH BRONCHITIS.
SONY PICTURES EXPANDED ITS
RELEASE OF "THE INTERVIEW" TO A
NATIONAL AUDIENCE TODAY.
THE FILM COMEDY, ABOUT A PLOT TO
KILL NORTH KOREA'S LEADER, MAY
NOW BE RENTED OR PURCHASED ON-
LINE.
IT WAS ALREADY BEING RELEASED IN
INDEPENDENT THEATERS.
MAJOR THEATER CHAINS DROPPED
PLANS TO SCREEN THE FILM AFTER
THREATS FROM A HACKERS' GROUP.
WALL STREET HAD HOLIDAY HOURS
TODAY.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED SIX POINTS TO CLOSE AT
18,030.
IT FINISHED ABOVE 18,000
YESTERDAY, FOR THE FIRST TIME.
THE NASDAQ ROSE EIGHT POINTS
TODAY TO CLOSE AT 4,773.
AND THE S&P 500 SLIPPED A
FRACTION, TO FINISH BELOW 2,082.
STILL TO COME ON THE NEWSHOUR:
A RARE GLIMPSE INSIDE THE
ISLAMIC STATE, FROM A WESTERN
WRITER GIVEN SPECIAL ACCESS
BEHIND THE TERRORIST FRONT
LINES.
THE MOUNTING PRESSURE ORVE
RECALLS OF AIRBAGS IN MILLIONS
OF CARS ON THE STREETS.
A NEW, VIRTUAL KIND OF COLLEGE
TH THRATOWS OUT THE NEED FOR
LECTURES, TENURE AND EVEN
CAMPUSES.
MAINTAINING THE HOLIDAY SPIRIT
DURING FAMILY GATHERINGS EVEN
WHEN THERE IS POLITICAL DISCORD.
CAPTURING TEENAGERS INTEREST IN
SCIENCE WITH LITTLE MORE THAN A
SPARK.
TEN YEARS AFTER INDONESIA'S
DEVASTATING TSUNAMI, ONE
VILLAGE'S FIGHT TO REBUILD.
>> Ifill: THE AMERICAN LED
COALITION FIGHTING THE ISLAMIC
STATE GROUP SUFFERED A BLOW
EARLIER TODAY.
U.S. CENTRAL COMMAND ISSUED A
STATEMENT SAYING THAT A
JORDANIAN F-16 WAR PLANE CRASHED
IN NORTHERN SYRIA.
THE JET'S PILOT WAS APPREHENDED
BY ISLAMIC STATE FIGHTERS.
IT'S THE FIRST TIME A COALITION
SERVICEMEMBER HAS FALLEN INTO
THE JIHADIST GROUP'S HANDS.
APART FROM ITS HIGH PROFILE
SLAYINGS OF AMERICAN JOURNALISTS
AND FOREIGN AID WORKERS,
BRUTALITY, AND RAPID LAND GRABS
IN IRAQ AND SYRIA, VERY LITTLE
IS KNOWN ABOUT THE ORGANIZATION
ALSO KNOWN AS ISIS OR ISIL.
TONIGHT, WE HEAR FROM ONE
WESTERNER WHO JUST SPENT 10 DAYS
INSIDE ISLAMIC STATE TERRITORY
AND LIVED TO TELL ABOUT IT.
GERMAN AUTHOR, ACTIVIST, AND
FORMER POLITICIAN JUERGEN
TODENHOFER DID THE SEEMINGLY
IMPOSSIBLE.
AFTER MONTHS OF NEGOTIATING OVER
SKYPE, HE WON A WRITTEN SECURITY
GUARANTEE FROM ISLAMIC STATE
FORCES, GRANTING SAFE PASSAGE
THROUGH THEIR TERRITORY, SO HE
COULD RESEARCH AN UPCOMING BOOK.
THE ISLAMIC STATE'S SEAT OF
POWER, AND THEN, TO THE IRAQI
CITY OF MOSUL.
THEY WERE TIGHTLY SUPERVISED,
BUT ALLOWED TO SHOOT INTERVIEWS
WITH ISLAMIC STATE FIGHTERS AND
EVEN PRISONERS.
>> WHAT DID THEY TELL YOU?
WHAT WILL HAPPEN TO YOU?
WILL YOU BE FREE ONE DAY?
>> ( translated ): THEY SAID,
THEY SAID, YOUR GOVERNMENT, AND
YOU ARE PRISONERS OF THE ISLAMIC
STATE AND THAT'S WHAT THEY SAID.
THEY DIDN'T SAY WE WILL KILL YOU
OR SLAUGHTER YOU.
>> Ifill: THE WRITER ALSO
REPORTED SEEING LOW-FLYING U.S.
AIRCRAFT.
HE LEFT ISLAMIC STATE TERRITORY
A FEW DAYS AGO AND IS NOW BACK
IN GERMANY.
I SPOKE TO JUERGEN TODENHOFER
EARLIER TODAY.
MR. TODDEN HOVER, THANK YOU
FOR JOINING US.
I WANT TO START BY ASKING
YOU WHY YOU DECIDED TO GO
BEHIND THE LINES WITH
ISLAMIC STATE FORCES?
>> BECAUSE I STARTED TO
WRITE A BOOK ABOUT ISIS AT
THE BEGINNING OF THE YEAR.
AND AFTER SOME MONTHS I
REALIZED THAT THERE WAS NO
REAL AUTHENTIC INFORMATION.
AND USUALLY WHEN I WRITE A
BOOK ABOUT AFGHANISTAN I GO
TO KARZAI, THE PRESIDENT
KARZAI AND I WENT TO THE
TALIBAN, THE LEADERS OF THE
TALIBAN.
AND I WENT TO IRAQ.
I MET THE GOVERNMENT AND I
MET THE IRAQI RESISTANCE.
I SPENT SEVEN DAYS WITH
THEM.
SO IT'S MY NORMAL STRATEGY
WHEN I WRITE SOMETHING, THAT
I SPEAK TO BOTH SIDES.
>> Ifill: YOU DIDN'T GO BY
YOURSELF, YOU WENT WITH YOUR
SON.
AND WHAT I'M
YOURUOUS-- CURIOUS ABOUT IS
HOW YOU GOT IN, WHO DO YOU
CALL TO GET BEHIND THE LINES
WITH ISIS FORCES?
>> I CALLED, I WROTE TO IRA
IRAN-- ABOUT-- WHICH WERE ON
FACEBOOK.
I GOT ABOUT 15 ANSWERS AND
WITH THESE 15 PEOPLE, I
STARTED SKOOIB CONVERSATIONS
SEVEN MONTHS AGO.
AND AT THE END, TWO WERE
INTERESTING.
AND WITH THESE TWO PEOPLE I
SKYPED MAYBE 20 HOURS ALL
TOGETHER.
AND WE HAD LONG DISCUSSIONS
ABOUT THEIR-- RELIGION AND
ALSO LONG DISCUSSIONS ABOUT
A GUARANTEE.
BECAUSE I SAID I WOULD ONLY
COME TO THE COUNTRY IF I
WOULD GET A CLEAR GUARANTEE.
AND I GOT A GUARANTEE FROM
THE OFFICE OF THE-- BUT THE
PROBLEM WAS IT WAS NOT SURE
WHETHER THE GUARANTEE WAS
GIVEN BY THE OFFICE OF THE
CALIFA.
I COULDN'T PROVE IT SO THE
DISCUSSIONS CONTINUED, AND
AT THE END I HAD THE
IMPRESSION THAT THE
GUARANTEE WAS CORRECT AND I
STARTED.
>> Ifill: SO YOU KIND OF
TOOK A RISK THAT THIS WAS
AGAIN BIN.
DID YOU-- GENUINE, DID YOU
HAVE TO MAKE ANY PLEDGES OF
ALLEGIANCE TO THE CLAL I
FATE TO GAIN ACCESS?
-- -- CALIPHATE TO GAIN
ACCESS.
>> NO, NOT ONE WORD, ONE
POSITIVE WORD.
THEY KNEW THAT-- I HAD
WRITTEN SEVERAL TIMES VERY
HARD AND CRITICAL ARTICLES
AGAINST IS.
THEY KNEW THAT I HAD MET
SEVERAL TIMES PRESIDENT
ASSAD.
THEY KNEW ALL THAT AND I
TOLD THEM.
YOU KNOW, YOU HAVE READ WHAT
I HAVE SAID BUT.
THEY SAID WE DON'T CARE
ABOUT YOUR PERSONAL OPINION.
>> SO WHAT WERE YOUR
IMPRESSIONS ABOUT HOW STRONG
ISIS IS, THERE IS SOME
DEBATE HERE AND AROUND THE
WORLD ABOUT THETHE
ISLAMIC STATE FORCES,
WHETHER IT FUNCTIONS AS A
GOVERNMENT, WHETHER IT HAS A
JUSTICE SYSTEM AND WHAT ITS
ULTIMATE GOAL IS.
WHAT IMPRESSIONS DID YOU
TAKE AWAY?
>> I GOT THE IMPRESSION THAT
I ASKED-- IS IS MUCH
STRONGER THAN OUR WESTERN
POLITICIANS THINK.
I HAVE MET THE TALIBAN
SEVERAL TIMES, THEIR
LEADERS.
I WAS IN THE ALGERIAN WAR.
I MET THE FOREIGN LEADER
NATIONALE LIBERATION.
THAT KNOCKED DOWN THE
FRENCH.
I HAVE SEEN VERY, VERY
STRONG GUERRILLA TROOPS.
BUT I THINK IS IS THE
STRONGEST I MET BECAUSE THEY
HAVE A-- WHICH IS
INCREDIBLE, AND THEY THINK,
THEY BELIEVE THAT THEY HAVE
A HISTORICAL MISSIN.O
AND THIS MISSION IS TO
DESTROY ALL THE RELIGIONS
BESIDES THE THREE RELIGEO,
BESIDES THE JEW, THE
CHRISTIANS AND THE MUSLIMS.
THE MUSS IMS IN IS STYLE
WHICH MEANS TO DESTROY ALL
THE MUSLIMS WHICH ARE
NOT-- WHO ARE NOT DEMOCRATIC.
A MUSLIM WHO IS DEMOCRATIC
HAS, AS THEY TOLD ME, TO BE
KILLED BECAUSE HE PUTS LAWS
MADE BY MAN ABOVE LAWS MADE
BY GOD.
AND IF THEY MAKE THESE
BEHEADINGS, THEY DON'T HAVE
THE FEELING THAT THEY DO
SOMETHING BAD.
THEY THINK YES, WE DO IT.
IT IS NECESSARY.
>> Ifill: THERE IS MUCH
CONVERSATION AS WELL ABOUT
THE INFLUX OF FOREIGN
FIGHTERS FROM THE UNITED
STATES AND OTHER PLACES.
DID YOU SEE EVIDENCE OF
THAT?
>> I THINK THE FOREIGN
FIGHTERS PLAY, ESPECIALLY IN
SYRIA, A VERY IMPORTANT ROLE
IN SYRIA, 70% OF THE
FIGHTERS ARE FOREIGNERS.
AND IN-- IRAQ 40% ARE
FOREIGN FIGHTERS.
AND THESE FOREIGN FIGHTERS
ARE ENTHUSIASTIC TOO.
I SPENT TWO LAST DAYS OF MY
STAY IN A KIND OF
RECRUITMENT HOUSE.
IT'S THE FIRST HOUSE WHERE
THE PEOPLE FROM EUROPE OR
FROM THE UNITED STATES
ARRIVE AND I MET FRENCH
PEOPLE.
I MET U.K. PEOPLE.
BUT I MET ALSO AMERICANS.
I MET AMERICANS FROM NEW
JERSEY.
I MET PEOPLE FROM THE
CARIBBEANS WHO HAD JUST
PASSED THEIR LAW EXAM AND
WHO PREFER TO FIGHT IN THE
ISLAMIC STATE INSTEAD OF
BEING A SUCCESSFUL LAWYER.
AND EVERY DAY MORE THAN 50
PEOPLE ARRIVED, ONLY IN THIS
RECRUITMENT CENTER.
AND THEY HAVE SEVERAL.
SO THEY CAN LOSE A HUNDRED
MEN IN ONE DAY, IT DOESN'T
MATTER.
>> Ifill: YOU SPENT TIME IN
IRAQ AND SYRIA, RAK A&M
OSUL.
WAS THERE A DIFFERENCE IN
WHAT YOU SAW IN THOSE TWO
PLACES?
>> YEAH, I ONLY CAN GIVE AN
IMPRESSION.
I HAD THE IMPRESSION THAT IN
MOSUL THEIR SUPPORT IS
STRONGER BECAUSE IN MOSUL
NOW YOU HAVE ONLY SUNNIS
BECAUSE THE SHI'AS, THE
YAZIDS AND CHRISTIANS HAVE
BEEN KILLED OR FORCED TO
FLEE.
AND THAT IN RAKA, BASHAR
AL-ASSAD IS STILL AT LEAST
AS STRONG AS IS.
WHAT IS TOLD ME.
AND ASSAD IS WORKING ALSO
WITH A TRICK.
HE IS STILL PLAYING-- PAYING
SALARIES TO HIS PEOPLE IN
RAKA AND IT SEEMS TO WORK.
SO THE SITUATION IN RAKA IS
NOT VERY CLEAR.
>> Ifill: HOW DOES IS
COMPARE IN YOUR IMPRESSION
TO AL QAEDA.
>> AL QAEDA IS A NON-- AN
EMPTY SHELL BESIDE I-S.
I-S IS MUCH STRONGER.
THERE IS NO COMPARISON.
AL QAEDA HAS NEVER BEEN AS
STRONG, EVEN IN THE TIMES OF
OSAMA BIN LADEN, HAS NEVER
BEEN AS STRONG AS AL
BAGHDADI.
AND EVEN IF THIS AL BAGHDADI,
THIS SO CALL CALIPH WILL DIE,
THE NEXT ONE WILL COME.
BECAUSE THEY THINK THEY HAVE
THIS HISTORICAL MISSION.
AND THEY SEE THAT THE WEST
DOESN'T HAVE A SUCCESSFUL
STRATEGY.
THERE IS NO STRATEGY.
YOU CANNOT BOMB-- YOU CANNOT
KNOCK DOWN THESE 5,000
FIGHTERS I-S FIGHTERS IN
MOSUL IN A CITY OF 3 MILLION
INHABITANTS, RESIDENTS.
BECAUSE THEY DON'T LIVE IN
ONE APARTMENT OR IN ONE
HOUSE OR IN TWO HOUSES OR
FIVE HOUSES.
THEY LIVE IN DIFFERENT
APARTMENTS.
AND EVERY APARTMENT, ONE OR
TWO.
THEY DON'T STICK TOGETHER.
SO YOU CANNOT BOMBARD THE
WHOLE CITY OF MOSUL JUST TO
FIGHT DOWN 5,000 FIGHTERS.
AND IF YOU SEND YOUR TROOPS,
EVEN YOUR BEST TROOPS, I
THINK THEY WOULD HAVE VERY
LITTLE CHANCES TO FIGHT IN
THE GUERRILLA WAR IN A BIG
CITY.
BECAUSE AN AMERICAN SOLDIER,
EVEN YOUR BEST SOLDIER, THE
MARINES OR SPECIAL FORCES,
THEY WANT TO COME HOME.
THEY WANT TO SUIVE.RV
BUT THESE PEOPLE WANT TO
DIE.
THEY WANT TO WIN AND THEY
ARE READY TO DIE.
>> Ifill: MANY AMERICANS
THEIR ONLY EXPOSURE TO ISIS
IS WHAT THEY DO TO WESTERN
HOSTAGES.
HOW DID YOU GET OUT?
HOW WERE YOU NOT TAKEN
HOSTAGE AND KILLED?
>> I HAD THIS GUARANTEE.
AND THE GUARANTEE OF THE
CALIPH IS-- THE MOST
IMPORTANT DOCUMENT THAT YOU
CAN HAVE IN THIS COUNTRY.
I HAD TO FEAR, I THINK, MUCH
MORE THE BOMBARDMENT BY THE
SYRIANS AND ALSO BY
AMERICANS.
SOME AMERICANS AIRPLANES
SOMETIMES HAVE BEEN VERY,
VERY LOW.
AND WHEN OUR DRIVER WHO WAS
A SECRET SERVICE GUY WAS
DRIVING BETWEEN RAK A&M OSUL
HE WAS ALWAYS WATCHING
THROUGH THE WINDOW TO SEE IF
AMERICAN DRONES WERE
FOLLOWING US.
SO I THINK MY RISK TO BE
BEHEADED-- WAS NOT TOO HIGH.
OTHERWISE I WOULDN'T HAVE
DONE.
>> Ifill: JUERGENED TOEN
HOVER, THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR
JOINING US AND TELLING US
YOUR STORY.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> Ifill: IT'S BEEN A RECORD
YEAR FOR AUTO RECALLS, WITH
DISTURBING STORIES ABOUT DEATHS,
INJURIES AND WARNING SIGNS THAT
WERE EITHER MISSED OR IGNORED BY
MANUFACTURERS AND THE
GOVERNMENT.
ONE OF THE BIGGEST RECALLS OF
THE YEAR INVOLVED AIRBAGS IN
MORE THAN 24 MILLION VEHICLES,
FROM A DOZEN MANUFACTURERS.
BUT THE MANUFACTURER OF THE
AIRBAGS, TAKATA CORPORATION, HAS
RESISTED CALLS TO DO MORE.
AND TODAY, ITS PRESIDENT STEPPED
DOWN.
HARI SREENIVASAN PICKS UP THE
STORY FROM THERE.
>> Sreenivasan: TODAY'S CHANGE
IS THE BIGGEST MOVE INSIDE
TAKATA SINCE THE TROUBLES BECAME
WELL KNOWN.
STEFAN STOCKER, THE COMPANY'S
FIRST NON-JAPANESE PRESIDENT,
WILL BE REPLACED BY THE
COMPANY'S CHAIRMAN AND C.E.O.,
SHIGHESA TAKADA.
HE'S THE GRANDSON OF THE
COMPANY'S FOUNDER.
BUT DOES THE MOVE HELP TAKATA
DEAL WITH MUICH BIGGER CONCERNS
OVER SAFETY? AND GET OUT FROM
THE CLOUD THAT HAS HUNG OVER THE
BUSINESS SINCE THE REPORTS
BEGAN?
DAVID SHEPARDSON OF THE DETROIT
NEWS HAS BEEN COVERING THIS
STORY.
AND JOINS ME FROM GRAND RAPIDS,
MICHIGAN.
SO WHY DID THEY FINALLY MAKE
THIS MOVE?
>> WELL, I THINK THIS IS
CLEARLY ANOTHER INDICATION
OF MR. TAKADA AND THE FAMILY
EXERTING MORE CONTROL OVER
THE COMPANY'S OPERATIONS.
AS YOU SAID, MR. STOCKER WAS
THE FIRST NONJAPANESE
PRESIDENT OF THE COMPANY AND
OVER THE FIRST TEN MONTHS
THE COMPANY HAS SEEN TENS OF
MILLIONS OF VEHICLES
RECALLED AROUND THE GLOBE,
IT'S RAISED THE STAKES FOR
THE COMPANY TO TRY TO SHOW
BOTH THE PUBLIC AND
AUTOMAKERS THAT THESE
VEHICLES ARE SAFE AND MORE
IMPORTANTLY, THAT THE
COMPANY HAS AN EFFECTIVE
SOLUTION TO FIXING THE
ISSUES AND FINDING THE ROOT
CAUSE.
>> Srennivasan: AND SPEAKING
OF THAT ROOT CAUSE, WHEN
MILLIONS OF VEHICLE OWNERS
TAKE THEIR CARS BACK INTO
THE SHOP TO GET THIS FIXED,
DO WE KNOW THAT THE NEW AIR
BAGS WON'T HAVE THESE
PROBLEMS?
>> WELL, THAT'S THE REAL
QUESTION.
AND THE OTHER ISSUE IS HOW
LONG WILL IT TAKE TO
ACTUALLY GET THOSE
REPLACEMENT PARTS.
AT CONGRESSIONAL HEARINGS
THIS MONTH, MEMBERS OF
CONGRESS ASKED THAT VERY
QUESTION.
THE PROBLEMS WITH THESE AIR
BAGS ARE TWOFOLD.
ONE ARE PRODUCTION ISSUES AS
WELL AS PROBLEMS WITH THE
PROPELLANT AT TWO FACTORIES
IN NORTH AMERICA.
AND MANY OF THE ISSUES HAVE
SHOWN UP FOUR, FIVE, SIX
YEARS AFTER THESE VEHICLES
WERE EXPOSED TO HIGH
HUMIDITY.
WE DON'T KNOW IF FOUR OR
FIVE YEARS FROM NOW THESE
SAME PROBLEMS WILL SURFACE
IN THESE REPLACEMENT AIR
BAGS.
MEANWHILE, IF WILL-- IT WILL
TAKE AT LEAST SIX MONTHS TO
A YEAR OR MORE TO GET THESE
MILLIONS OF VEHICLES' AIR
BAGS REPLACED BECAUSE THERE
ARE SO MANY VEHICLES AHEAD
OF THEM.
NOW TAKATA SAYS IN JANUARY
THEY'RE GOING TO UP THE
PRODUCTION RATE FROM ABOUT
300,000 REPLACEMENT
INFLATORS TO 450,000.
BUT IN ITS WAKE OF THAT
COMPANIES LIKE HONDA HAVE
TAKEN A STEP OF HIRING AN
OUTSIDE, ANOTHER COMPANY TO
ALSO BUILD REPLACEMENT PARTS
AM BUT THEY WON'T BE READY
FOR ANOTHER SIX MONTHS.
>> Srennivasan: AND THE
COMPANY, TAKATA, HAD BEEN
RESISTANT TO THIS WIDER
RECALL FOR QUITE SOME TIME,
RIGHT?
>> RIGHT.
BACK IN MID-NOVEMBER THE
NATIONAL HIGHWAY TRAFFIC
SAFETY ADMINISTRATION
DEMANDED THAT FIVE COMPANIES
AND TAKATA DECLARE THE
DRIVER SIDE AIR BAGS
DEFECTIVE ACROSS THE
COUNTRY.
BEFORE THAT THESE VECKS WERE
RECALLED IN HIGH HUMIDITY
AREAS LIKE FLORIDA, HAWAII,
PARTS OF THE GULF COAST.
BUT THEY WOULD NOT EXPAND
THAT NATIONALLY.
THEN THEN THE GOVERNMENT
LEARNED OF AN INCIDENT IN
AUGUST IN NORTH CAROLINA, A
FORD MUSTANG IN WHICH
SHRAPNEL EXPLODED FROM A AIR
BAG CAUSING LEG INJURIES.
THAT WAS ENOUGH FOR THE
GOVERNMENT TO DECIDE THAT
THIS AIR BAG RECALL SHOULD
BE EXPANDED NATIONALLY.
AND THEN ON MONDAY BMW
BECAME THE LAST OF THE FIVE
COMPANIES DEMANDED TO EXPAND
THEIR RECALL.
TAKATA HAS NOT TAKEN THAT
STEP.
AND THE REAL QUESTION IS
WILL THEY DO IT EVENTUALLY
OR IS THIS ABOUT COST.
>> Srennivasan: SPEAKING OF
COST, IS THIS THE NEW
NORMAL?
I MEAN ALL OF THESE RECALLS
DO ADD SOME COST TO THE
OVERALL VEHICLE AND THE
MANUFACTURER.
ARE MANUFACTURERS MORE
LIKELY TO PASS THOSE COSTS
ON TO CONSUMERS?
>> YOU KNOW, THEY'RE GOING
TO HAVE TO AT SOME POINT
BECAUSE THESE COSTS ARE
RUNNING INTO THE BILLIONS OF
DOLLARS FOR THESE RECALLS.
I MEAN AT THE END OF THIS
YEAR, THE U.S. THERE HAVE
ABOUT AT LEAST 61 MILLION
VEHICLES RECALLED.
THAT'S MORE THAN TWICE THE
ALL-TIME RECORD SET IN 2004.
ON MONDAY OF THIS WEEK A NEW
NATIONAL HIGHWAY TRAFFIC
ADMINISTRATOR MARK ROSEKIND
WAS SWORN IN.
HE'S NOW TAKING A FRESH
LOOK.
AND HE COMES FROM THE
NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION
SAFETY BOARD WHERE HE WAS A
VERY STRONG SAFETY ADVOCATE.
AND HE'S BEEN CHARGED WITH
REALLY SHAKING UP THE AGENCY,
MAKING SURE THEY'RE DOING A
GOOD JOB OF HOLDING AUTO
COMPANY'S FEET TO THE FIRE.
SO IT'S HARD TO SEE NITSA
RETURNING TO AN ERA WHEN
THEY WERE NOT AS AGGRESSIVE.
IF ANYTHING, THEY ARE LIKELY
TO BE MORE AGGRESSIVE GOING
FORWARD.
>> Srennivasan: AND WHAT ARE
AUTO MANUFACTURERS BRACING
FOR WHEN THEY KNOW THERE IS
GOING TO BE A NEW SHERIFF IN
TOWN AND HE HAS A MORE
AGGRESSIVE STANCE?
>> WELL, I THINK YOU ARE
ALREADY SEEING IN THE FLOOD
OF RECALLS THIS YEAR, THAT
AUTO COMPANIES ARE BEING
MUCH MORE CAREFUL TO FOLLOW
THE RULES.
AND THE RULES ARE WITHIN
FIVE DAYS OF DETERMINING OF
A DEFECT, YOU HAVE TO RECALL
THOSE VEHICLES AND NOTIFY
THE GOVERNMENT.
ALREADY THIS YEAR WE'VE SEEN
RECORD FINES TO COMPANIES
FOR NOT NOTIFYING THE
GOVERNMENT IN A TIMELY
FASHION.
NOT RECALLING ENOUGH
VEHICLES AND NOT RECALLING
SIMILAR VEHICLES WITH
PROBLEMS.
AND THE GOVERNMENT HAS TAKEN
A VERY TOUGH LINE WITH
COMPANIES THAT DRAG THEIR
FEET.
SO COMPANIES ARE TRYING TO
MOVE FASTER.
THEY'RE TAKING A LOOK AT ALL
OF THEIR RECALL OPERATIONS
AND THEY'RE BASICALLY
BRACING FOR HUNDREDS OF
MILLIONS OR BILLIONS OF
DOLLARS IN FUTURE COSTS.
>> Srennivasan: ALL RIGHT,
DAVID SHEPARDSON OF THE
"DETROIT NEWS", THANK YOU SO
MUCH FOR JOINING US TONIGHT.
>> THANKS, HARI.
HAPPY CHRISTMAS TO YOU.
>> Srennivasan: YOU TOO.
>> Ifill: WITH THE COST OF A
COLLEGE EDUCATION IN THE
NEIGHBORHOOD OF A QUARTER OF A
MILLION DOLLARS AT SOME SCHOOLS
THESE DAYS, THERE ARE GROWING
NUMBERS OF STUDENTS, EDUCATORS
AND SOME SILICON VALLEY
EXECUTIVES WHO ARE STARTING TO
RETHINK THE VALUE, AND THE
BUSINESS MODEL, OF A HIGHER
EDUCATION.
AS SCIENCE CORRESPONDENT MILES
O'BRIEN REPORTS, A SMALL GROUP
OF PIONEERS BELIEVES THERE MAY
BE ANOTHER WAY.
>> HOW ARE YOU FEELING.
>> IT'S A FRESHMAN DORM IN A
COLLEGE WITH SOME FRESH
IDEAS ABOUT HIGHER EDUCATION.
>> SO MUCH FUN.
>> IAN VAN BUZZ DOES KIRK IS
ONE OF 28 FOUNDING STUDENTS
AT SAN FRANCISCO'S MINERVA
SCHOOL.
>> EVERYONE IS VERY DRIVEN,
VERY HUMBLE, VERY MOTIVATED
TOWARD NOT ONLY THEIR OWN
GOALS BUT ALSO THE GOAL OF
CREATING AN INSTITUTION, A
LASTING IMPACT ON HIGHER
EDUCATION.
>> Reporter: LIKE EVERYONE
ELSE HERE, HE IS A GIFTED
STUDENT.
HE WAS ACCEPTED AT DUKE
UNIVERSITY BUT ENED UP
COMING TO A COLLEGE THAT
FEELS LIKE A SILICON VALLEY
START-UP.
BECAUSE IT IS.
SULTANO IS ALSO IN THE
FOUNDING MINERVA CLASS.
>> I THINK PEOPLE HAVE BEEN
THUMPING AROUND THE WORLD
GUINEA PIG.
BUT I WOULD NOT CALL US
GUINEA PIGS AT ALL.
BECAUSE GUINEA PIGS CAN'T
NECESSARILY SAY WHAT THEY
ARE FEELING OR HOW THEY ARE
THINKING.
>> MINERVA IS A HIGHLY
COMPETITIVE LIBERAL ARTS
COLLEGE WITHOUT A SINGLE
CLASSROOM, MUCH LESS ANIFFY
TRIMMED CAMPUS.
THE DORMITORY IS ON ONE
FLOOR OF THIS OLD APARTMENT
BUILDING.
STUDENTS WILL SPEND THE
FIRST YEAR HERE, AND THEN
THE SUBSEQUENT SIX SEMESTERS
LIVING AND STUDYING IN SIX
DIFFERENT CITIES AROUND THE
WORLD.
NEXT YEAR THEY
BUENOS AIRES.
AND BERLIN.
AND BUT THE PROFESSORS DON'T
GO WITH THEM.
IN FACT, THEY CAN BE
ANYWHERE INCLUDING HOME.
BECAUSE THEY SEE THEIR
STUDENTS EXCLUSIVELY ON-LINE
VIA PROPRIETARY SOFTWARE
PLATFORM CALLED THE AGO OF
LEARNING FORUM.
IT FOSTERS A FACE-PACED
ENGAGING SEMINAR STYLE
CLASS.
NO LECTURES ALLOWED.
STUDIES SHOW STUDENTS ONLY
RETAIN ABOUT 10% OF WHAT
THEY LEARN THIS WAY TWO
YEARS LATER.
>> SO WHAT ARE WE SEEING
HERE, IS THIS THE
PROGRESSION OF THE IDEA.
>> BEN NELSON IS THE FOUNDER
AND C.E.O. OF MINERVA.
>> IMAGINE YOU WERE TO GO TO
A STORE TO BUY ANYTHING.
AND THEY WOULD SAY OH, YES,
THIS PRODUCT IS A GREAT
PRODUCT.
YOU KNOW, 90% OF THEM FAILED
WITHIN TWO YEARS.
WHO WOULD BUY THAT PRODUCT?
>> WELL, HELLO AND WELCOME,
EVERYBODY.
>> INSTEAD OF TENURE,
PROFESSORS HERE GET STOCK
OPTIONS.
AND TUITION?
$10,000 A YEAR.
ALTHOUGH THE FOUNDING CLASS
GETS A FREE RIDE.
NO FEDERAL GRANTS OR LOANS
ARE ACCEPTED.
BEFORE H
COLLEGE FROM SCRATCH WITH
POST-IT NOT,ES NELSON WAS
THE PRESIDENT OF THE ON-LINE
PHOTO PRINTING COMPANY
SNAPFISH.
>> OUR GOAL IS TO CREATE A
MOVEMENT WHERE YOU ACTUALLY
HAVE SUBSTANTIALLY BETTER
QUALITY EDUCATION, IN A MORE
EFFECTIVE WAY, IN A LOWER
COST WAY.
AND HAVE THAT BE A MODEL FOR
OTHER INSTITUTIONS TO
EMULATE.
>> HE HAS USED HIS START-UP
ACUMEN TO RAISE $90,000 IN
VENTURE CAPITAL.
MINERVA IS A FOR-PROFIT
CORPORATION, ACCREDITED
THROUGH A PARTNERSHIP WITH
CALIFORNIA'S TECH GRADUATE
INSTITUTE.
THE FOUNDING DEAN IS FORMER
HARVARD PROFESSOR STEPHEN
KOSLIN.
HE DESIGNED THE CURRICULUM
BASED ON YEARS OF RESERVE ON
VISUAL PERCEPTION, MENTAL
IMAGERY AND MEMORY.
>> IF YOU GET ENGAGED WITH
SOMETHING, ARE YOU VERY
LIKELY TO REMEMBER IT,
WHETHER YOU WANT TO OR NOT.
JUST THE ACT OF THINKING IT
THROUGH IS GOING TO MAKE IT
STICK.
>> KOSSLYN'S FORMER
COLLEAGUE HARVARD PROFESSOR
ERIC MAZURE PIONEERED THE
IDEA OF ACT OF LEARNING 24
YEARS AGO WHEN HE REALIZED
HIS STUDENTS WERE NOT
RETAINING MUCH OF HIS
LECTURES ON PHYSICS.
>> I DISCOVERED THAT MY
STUDENTS WEREN'T EVEN
LEARNING THE MOST BASIC
THINGS.
THEY WERE LEARNING-- THEY
WERE MEM ORIZING AND
APPLYING THINGS BY ROUT.
SO THAT MADE ME REALIZE THAT
MY QUOTE, UNQUOTE, EXCELLENT
TEACHING WASN'T THAT
EXCELLENT AT ALL.
AND MADE ME THINK ABOUT WHAT
I WAS DOING.
>> SO HE FLIPPED HIS
CLASSROOM AROUND.
STUDENTS STARTED GATHERING
INFORMATION ON THEIR OWN.
CLASS TIME SPENT APPLYING
THE KNOWLEDGE TO SOLVE
PROBLEMS.
IN MAY IN MINERVA'S
NONPROFIT ACADEMY NAMED HIM
THE FIRST WINNER OF THE
MINERVA PRIZE FOR
ADVANCEMENTS IN HIGHER
EDUCATION.
HE SAYS HE IS THRILLED TO
SEE HIS PHILOSOPHY EMBRACED
IN THIS MANNER BUT --
>> MY MAIN WORRY IS THE FACT
THAT THEIR ENTIRE OR A HUGE
PART OF THEIR EXPERIENCE IS
IN A DORM ROOM.
PEOPLE ARE SITTING IN ROOMS
TO PARTICIPATE WITH A WALL
BETWEEN THEM.
AND NOT ACTUALLY PHYSICALLY
BRINGING THEM TOGETHER.
>> WE COULD HAVE DONE THAT.
WE COULD HAVE JUST SAID HEY,
LET'S DO EVERYTHING THAT WE
ARE DOING NOW, EXCEPT DO IT
IN A ROOM.
IT TURNS OUT THE EDUCATION
IS WORSE.
>> WHAT THEY GET IS NOT WHAT
YOU MIGHT EXPECT WHEN YOU
THINK OF ON-LINE LEARNING.
MINERVA BEARS LITTLE
RESEMBLANCE TO MASSIVE OPEN
ON-LINE COURSES OR MOOKS
WHICH BRING THE LECTURE HAUL --
HALL TO CYBERSPACE.
>> GOOD AFTERNOON EVERYONE.
>> WE WATCHED AS A PROFESSOR
TAUGHT THIS 70 MINUTE CLASS
IN FORMAL ANALYSES.
>> I LOVE TO TREAT MY
STUDENTSES APPEARS SO WE CAN
SOLVE PROBLEMS TOGETHER.
>> THE OBSERVED DIFFERENCE
IS EQUAL TO 0.078.
>> THE SUBJECT ON THIS.
>> IT BEGINS WITH A QUIZ.
>> SO YOU CAN EXPLAIN WHY
YOU THINK TWO IS NOT
CORRECT?
>> YEAH.
SO-- IT IS A SMALLER VALUE
FOR ALPHA, I THINK WHY TWO
IS WRONG.
>> YES.
>> NO WAY TO QUIETLY ZONE
OUT ON FACEBOOK IN THIS
CLASS.
STUDENTS GET CALLED ON
FREQUENTLY REASONS RAJON,
YOU ARE HERE, TELL ME WHAT
IS THE --
>> IT REALLY IS TAKING THE
SEMINAR THAT YOU WOULD GET
IN REAL LIFE, DISTILLING IT
DOWN TO WHAT IT SHOULD BE,
WHAT IT SHOULD COMMUNICATE,
AND THEN APPLYING THAT TO AN
ON-LINE SETTING.
>> THEY CAN RAISE THEIR
AND ASK
QUESTIONS VIA TEXT.
>> HE WRITES ON THE VIRTUAL
BLACKBOARD, A SHARED
DOCUMENT SEEN BY ALL.
HE DIVIDES THE CLASS INTO
BREAKOUT GROUPS WITH A
PROBLEM TO SOLVE ON THEIR
OWN AND TAKES A POLL.
>> OF THOSE WHO CHOSE
SLIGHTLY INCREASED, I WOULD
BE VERY CURIOUS TO HEAR WHAT
YOUR REASONING IS HERE.
>> EVERYONE IS WATCHED AND
RECORDED BY AN UNBLINKING
EYEWITNESSES THANK YOU FOR
YOUR ATTENTION AND THANK YOU
FOR YOUR ENTHUSIASM.
AND I WILL SEE YOU ON
THURSDAY.
>> HE THEN REPLAYS THE CLASS
AND GRADES STUDENTS ON THEIR
PERFORMANCE.
THEY GET INSTANT AND
CONSTANT FEEDBACK ON HOW
THEY ARE DOING.
>> IT'S REALLY USEFUL TO BE
ABLE TO HAVE THE PROFESSOR
RIGHT THERE, WHO LATER GOES
BACK AND IS ABLE TO GIVE YOU
FEEDBACK ON WHAT YOU SAID
AND HELP YOU OUT WITH
CERTAIN CONCEPTS YOU MIGHT
BE STRUGGLING WITH.
>> WE ARE TAKING THIS
PRINCIPALS LEARNING AND
WE'RE CREATING A COMPLETELY
NEW WAY OF TEACHING THAT IS
BASED ON THE PRINCIPLES OF
LEARNING.
AND WHAT IS INTERESTING TO
ME IS THAT ACTUALLY NO
UNIVERSITY HAS DONE THAT.
IT'S CRAZY.
>> COURSES HERE ARE TIGHTLY
LINKED TO EACH OTHER THEM
ATICALLY.
ALL AIMED AT TEACHING 129
SO-CALLED HABITS OF MIND.
IT IS LIBERAL ARTS WITH A
LOT OF STRUCTURE.
>> THE PROBLEM WITH THE
TRADITIONAL UNIVERSITY IS
THAT THERE IS NO GLUE.
WHATEVER HAPPENS IN THE
COURSE IS WHATEVER THE
PROFESSOR WANTS.
AND WHATEVER THE PROFESSOR
WANTS HAS NO IDEA WHAT OTHER
PROFESSORS HAVE DONE WITH
THOSE STUDENTS.
>> DO YOU THINK THE
UNIVERSITIES ARE REALLY
PAYING ATTENTION TO WHAT ARE
YOU DOING.
>> YES.
>> REALLY, HOW DO YOU KNOW?
>> THE GLARE IS PALPABLE.
WE FEEL THEM STARING.
>> EDUCATORS ARE, INDEED,G THIST
CLOSELY.
BUT SINCE IT IS SO NEW, THE
JURY IS STILL OUT.
MINERVA IS CLEARLY NOT FOR
EVERY STUDENT OR FOR EVERY
CURRICULUM.
BUT IT MAY TAKE A BRASH
START-UP THAT IS AIMING HIGH
TO FIX WHAT'S WRONG WITH
HIGHER EDUCATION.
MILES O'BRIEN, PBS NEWSHOUR,
SAN FRANK.
-- SAN FRANCISCO.
MENT
>> Ifill: IT IS, OF COURSE, THE
HOLIDAY SEASON.
A TIME OF JOY AND LOVE, AND OF
COURSE, THE OCCASIONAL FAMILY
DISPUTE.
ONE MOMENT ON C-SPAN RECENTLY
CAUGHT OUR ATTENTION.
BROTHERS BRAD AND DALLAS
WOODHOUSE WERE SPEAKING ABOUT
THEIR OWN SHARP POLITICAL DIVIDE
WHEN THEY TOOK A SURPRISE CALL.
>> LET'S GO TO JOY IN
RALEIGH, NORTH CAROLINA.
>> HEY, SOMEBODY'S FROM DOWN
SOUTH.
>> ARE YOU RIGHT I'M FROM
DOWN SOUTH.
>> OH GOSH, MOM.
>> AND I'M YOUR MOTHER.
AND I DISAGREE THAT ALL
FAMILIES ARE LIKE OURS.
I DON'T KNOW MANY FAMILIES
THAT ARE FIGHTING AT
THANKSGIVING.
>> IS THIS REALLY YOUR
MOTHER.
>> THIS IS MY MOM.
>> I WAS VERY GLAD THAT THIS
THANKSGIVING WAS A YEAR THAT
YOU TWO WERE SUPPOSED TO GO
TO YOUR IN-LAWS AN I WAS --
AND I'M HOPING WILL YOU HAVE
SOME OF THIS OUT OF YOUR
SYSTEM WHEN YOU COME HERE
FOR CHRISTMAS.
>> Ifill: IS IT SO UNUSUAL TO
HAVE A FAMILY THAT FIGHTS OVER
POLITICS DURING THE HOLIDAYS?
WE DECIDED TO ASK A FEW PEOPLE
IN A HEAVILY POLITICAL AREA,
JUST OUTSIDE OF WASHINGTON.
>> I'M ONE OF THOSE PEOPLE.
WE JUST DON'T DISCUSS IT.
I'M ON ONE END AND MY
BROTHER IS ON THE OTHER END
AND WE JUST DO NOT DISCUSS
IT, PERIOD.
>> IT IS THE HOLIDAYS, NO
MATTER IF IT IS CHRISTMAS,
HANUKKAH, KWANZA, IT'S TIME
FOR FAMILY AND EVERYBODY PUT
THING AS SIDE AND WORRY
ABOUT WHAT, WHO WE ARE.
FAMILY.
>> JUST REMEMBER THEY ARE
YOUR FAMILY, YOU DON'T HAVE
TO AGREE WITH THEM.
>> I THINK WE CAN'T GET AWAY
FROM IT.
I THINK IT IS INEVITABLE.
SO WE ARE ALL JUST KIND OF
ENJOY OURSELVES, HOPEFULLY
SAFE AND
>> Ifill: HARI SREENIVASAN HAS
MORE ON THE SCIENCE OF
RELATIONSHIPS AND HOW TO AVOID
PROBLEMS AT YOUR FAMILY TABLE.
>> Sreenivasan: JOINING ME NOW
FROM RALEIGH, NORTH CAROLINA IS
THE CIVILITY COLUMNIST FOR THE
WASHINGTON POST, STEVEN PETROW.
THANKS FOR BEING WITH US.
SO A LOT OF US ARE HEADING
TO DINNERS OR TIME WITH
FAMILY THAT INEVITABLY HAS
SOME STRESS BUILT IN BECAUSE
OF THE OPINIONS THAT THEY
MIGHT HOLD, WHETHER IT'S
ABOUT POLITICS, WHETHER IT'S
ABOUT OTHER ISSUES THAT ARE
FACING AMERICA RIGHT NOW.
HOW DO YOU DEAL WITH THOSE
FAMILY MEMBERS WHO YOU JUST
REALLY DISAGREE WITH
STRONGLY?
>> WELL, FIRST OF ALL, GREAT
TO BE WITH YOU, HAPPY
CHRISTMAS EVE.
YOU KNOW, I PUT A LITTLE
POST UP ON MY FACEBOOK WALL
EARLIER THIS AFTERNOON AND
QUICKLY GOT SOME SNARK BACK
ON THIS QUESTION.
EAT BY YOURSELF OR BRING
LOTS OF DUCT TAPE.
SO I'M GOING TO MOVE AWAY
FROM THE SNARK HERE.
LET ME JUST SAY, THIS IS NOT
REALLY EASY.
EVERYONE THINKS CIVILITY IS
SOMETHING THAT JUST ROLLS
OFF YOUR TONGUE.
WE HAVE JUST BEEN THROUGH A
BRUISING POLITICAL SEASON,
LEFT AND RIGHT, DEMOCRAT AND
REPUBLICAN.
SO MANY FOLKS ARE HABIT
YATED ON SOCIAL MEDIA WHERE
SNARK AND SASS AND
EVERYTHING IS THE LANGUAGE
DU JOUR.
AND ALL OF A SUDDEN BAM,
IT'S CHRISTMAS DAY.
AND FAMILY IS IN ONE ROOM
AROUND ONE TABLE LOOKING AT
EACH OTHER.
AND HOPING TO GET OUT OF
THERE ALIVE.
SO I HAVE THREE POINTERS I
TFIRST IS, MAKE SOME
PRERULES.
THAT MEANS YOU NEED TO DO
THAT TONIGHT.
WHAT DO I MEAN BY THAT?
IF YOU KNOW THE TRIGGERS IN
YOUR FAMILY, THE HOT TOPICS,
LET'S SAY IT'S MARRIAGE
EQUALITY OR FERGUSON OR
ABORTION, AGREE BEFOREHAND
YOU ARE NOT GOING TO HAVE
THEM ON THE TABLE TOMORROW.
JUST PUT THEM ASIDE.
YOU CAN COME BACK.
NUMBER TWO, DON'T PERSONALIZE
IT.
IF YOU ARE GOING TO TALK
ABOUT ISSUES, DON'T DARE SAY
UNCLE JOHN, YOU ARE, YOU
KNOW, BARACK OBAMA INCAR
NATIONAL OR MITCH McCONNELL
INCARNATE, WHATEVER IT IS.
SO KEEP IT GENERAL.
AND I THINK THE LAST POINT
IS REALLY IMPORTANT.
WE HAVE LOST THE ART OF
CONVERSATION AND LISTENING.
I THINK A LOT OF THAT COMES
FROM SOCIAL MEDIA, HARI.
WE ARE SO USED TO BLOCKING
AND BLAMING AND DEFENDING
THAT WE DON'T KNOW HOW TO
LISTEN.
WE DON'T KNOW HOW TO ENGAGE
PEOPLE.
I REALLY WANT TO ENCOURAGE
EVERYONE TO DO A LITTLE BIT
MORE OF THAT AND SEE WHERE
THESE CONVERSATIONS CAN GO.
BECAUSE IT'S REALLY GREAT TO
HAVE FRIENDS AND FAMILY THAT
YOU DON'T ALWAYS AGREE WITH.
YOU ACTUALLY LEARN FROM
THEM.
>> I'VE SEEN SOME STATS THAT
SAY A QUARTER OF US HAVE
DEFRIENDED PEOPLE BASED ON
SOME OF THE THINGS THAT THEY
HAVE SHARED ON SOCIAL MEDIA
SITES LIKE FACEBOOK OR
TWITTER.
POLICY DISAGREEMENTS, REALLY,
THAT WE DON'T NECESSARILY
THINK ABOUT.
BUT WE SAY, YOU KNOW,
SOMEHOW IT DOES AFFECT THE
CORE OF US AND WHO WE ARE.
>> YEAH.
I WAS VERY SURPRISED THAT
PEW STUDY STATISTIC, 26%
HAVE DEFRIENDED OR BLOCKED
FOR POLITICAL MATTER IT IS
NOT EVEN SOMETHING PERSONAL.
IT IS POLITICS.
AND WE'VE REALLY GOTTEN
HABIT ATED TO NOT WANTING TO
SEE THOSE WHO DISAGREE WITH
US.
YOU KNOW, AND NOT WANTING TO
TALK WITH THEM.
AND THAT'S REFLECTIVE OF THE
LARGER CULTURE.
AND I THINK WHEN MANY OF US
SAY WHAT CAN WE DO ABOUT
THIS WORLD THAT WE LIVE IN,
ONE THING WE CAN DO IS START
AT HOME AT THE HOLIDAY TABLE
TOMORROW.
YOU KNOW, ONE STRATEGY THAT
PEOPLE SOMETIMES TAKE IS 9
SILENT TREATMENT.
LET'S JUST AVOID THIS ALL
TOGETHER.
LET'S JUST DEAL WITH THIS
ONCE A YEAR.
I CAN BE IN THE SAME ROOM
WITH THIS PERSON BUT I DON'T
HAVE TO TALK ABOUT IT.
LET'S JUST NOT TALK WITH
THEM ALL TOGETHER.
DOES THAT WORK?
>> I'M AFRAID NOT.
BUT IT'S A VERY PREVALENT
TACTIC OR STRATEGY.
AND THERE'S A STUDY THAT
CAME OUT FROM TEXAS
CHRISTIAN NOT LONG AGO,
14,000 PEOPLE.
AND IT LOOKED DEFECTS OF THE
COLD SHOULDER EFFECT OR
SILENT TREATMENT.
AND BASICALLY THE RESULT WAS
IT IS MAN I LATIF AND NOT
PRODUCTIVE.
SO FOLKS, AGAIN, IT'S ABOUT
TALKING.
IT DOESN'T MEAN THAT WE'RE
GOING TO AGREE.
IT MEANS THAT WE'RE GOING TO
FIND OUR WAY THROUGH THIS.
AND I THINK AT EVERY TABLE
TOMORROW THERE WILL BE
CONFLICTS.
THAT IS REALLY A GIVEN.
IT'S HOW WE MANAGE THEM THAT
IS IMPORTANT.
HOW WE TALK OUR WAY THROUGH.
SO NO SILENT TREATMENT,
SORRY.
>> Srennivasan: AND IF IT'S
NOT INTENSE POLITICAL
DISAGREEMENT OR ABOUT THE
STATE OF RACE IN AMERICA OR
INEQUALITY, WHAT IF IT IS
JUST THE PERSON THAT YOU ARE
GOING TO HAVE DINNER WITH
THAT IS ANNOYING.
AND YOU KNOW IT'S ANNOYING
AND OTHER PEOPLE KNOW IT'S
ANNOYING BUT YOU HAVE TO SIT
WITH IT AND BEAR IT.
WHAT IS YOUR BEST TIP.
>> HARI, DO YOU HAVE ONE OF
THOSE IN YOUR FAMILY TOO.
>> I'M TAKE THE FIFTH.
>> I'M TAKE THE FIFTH TOO
BECAUSE I HAVE TWO FAMILIES
PROBABLY WATCHING.
YOU KNOW, THERE'S ACTUALLY A
BEAUTY ABOUT HAVING ONE
PERSON IN THE FAMILY WHO
IRRITATES EVERYBODY.
IT BONDS AND BANDS EVERYONE
ELSE TOGETHER.
THAT USED TO HAPPEN IN MY
FAMILY WITH MY LATE UNCLE
RAY, I CAN NAME NAMES NOW.
YOU KNOW, TAKE IT WITH A
GRAIN OF SALT.
THE EVENING IS ONLY GOING TO
BE A COUPLE OF HOURS LONG.
AND THEN IT WILL BE NEXT
YEAR.
>> AND FAMILY LASTS FOREVER.
>> FAMILY LASTS FOREVER,
EXACTLY.
THAT'S WHAT THIS HOLIDAY IS
ABOUT.
IT'S ABOUT FAMILY.
LET'S NOT FORGET THAT.
>> STEVEN PETROW, YOU CAN
ALSO FIND OTHER TIPS ON-LINE.
STEVEN PETROW, THANKS SOME
OF FOR JOINING US.
>> THANKS, HARI.
HAPPY CHRISTMAS TO YOU.
>> Ifill: EVERY YEAR, FIRE
DEPARTMENTS IN THE UNITED STATES
RESPOND TO MORE THAN 200
CHRISTMAS TREE FIRES, WHICH ARE
OFTEN MORE DEADLY THAN OTHER
HOUSE FIRES.
TONIGHT WE TAKE A LOOK AT A
PROGRAM AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
MARYLAND THAT USES CHRISTMAS
TREE BURNS TO TEACH HIGH SCHOOL
STUDENTS, NOT ONLY ABOUT FIRE
SAFETY BUT ABOUT THE RELEVANCE
OF SCIENCE AND MATH.
THE NEWSHOUR'S APRIL BROWN HAS
THIS REPORT, PART OF OUR
AMERICAN GRADUATE SERIES, A
PUBLIC MEDIA INITIATIVE FUNDED
BY THE CORPORATION FOR PUBLIC
BROADCASTING.
>> Reporter: THIS TIME OF YEAR
MOST PEOPLE WOULD BUY A
CHRISTMAS TREE TO MAKE THE
HOLIDAYS MORE FESTIVE.
BUT SCIENTIST ISAAC LEVENTON HAS
A COMPLETELY DIFFERENT PLAN FOR
THIS ONE, WHICH HASN'T HAD ANY
WATER FOR A WEEK.
IT'S ALL IN THE NAME OF SCIENCE.
>> WHAT'S REALLY MAKING US SAFE
IS THAT THERE IS NOTHING NEAR
THAT TREE FOR 10-15 FEET THAT
CAN CATCH ON FIRE.
>> Reporter: LEVENTON IS A
GRADUATE STUDENT AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND'S
DEPARTMENT OF FIRE PROTECTION
ENGINEERING.
HIS LARGE-SCALE, CONTROLLED BURN
OF THIS TREE AND T OTHWOERS IS
THE FINALE FOR A FIRE SCIENCE
CLASS HE CREATED FOR HIGH SCHOOL
STUDENTS.
>> I THINK EVERYONE AT SOME
POINT LIKES PLAYING WITH FIRE
AND THAT KIND OF KEEPS YOU HERE.
>> Reporter: THE 10TH AND 11TH
GRADERS WILL GATHER DATA FROM
EACH BURN ANDVEN ETUALLY COMPARE
THE HEAT RELEASE RATES TO
DETERMINE WHICH FIRE IS MORE
POWERFUL.
THE CLASS IS FREE FOR THE DOZEN
STUDENTS WHO LIVE NEAR THE
COLLEGE PARK CAMPUS WHO APPLY
AND ARE ACCEPTED INTO THE EIGHT-
WEEK PROGRAM.
LEVENTON STARTED IT TWO YEARS
AGO WITH THE GOAL OF USING FIRE
TO SPARK AND GROW INTEREST IN
SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, ENGINEERING
AND MATH, COLLECTIVELY KNOWN AS
THE STEM FIELDS, WHICH EXPERTS
SAY ARE CRITICAL TO AMERICA'S
FUTURE ECONOMIC COMPETITIVENESS.
BUT SOME EDUCATORS HAVE
STRUGGLED TO MAKE THESE SUBJECTS
ENGAGING AND RELEVANT.
IN THIS CLASS, SETTING FIRES
DOES BOTH.
>> FOR A NUMBER OF THEM YOU KNOW
YOU HAVE TO STUDY CALCULUS OR
CHEMISTRY AND PHYSICS, AND IN
THE ONE SEMESTER WE HAVE I CAN'T
TEACH THEM ALL OF THESE THINGS
BUT I CAN SHOW THEM HERE IS HOW
WE CAN USE BASIC CHEMISTRY TO
PREDICT THE TEMPERATURE OF ANY
FLAME OF OUR MATERIAL AND THEN
YOU CAN SAY OK MAYBE CHEMISTRY
HAS AN APPLICATION.
>> Reporter: STUDENTS LIKE ERIN
STEWARTSON AND PABLO RUIZ  DO
NOT RECEIVE  HIGH SCHOOL OR
COLLEGE CREDIT FOR TAKING THE
CLASS, WHICH MAKES IT ALL THE
MORE IMPRESSIVE THEY SHOW UP
EVERY OTHER WEEK FOR SEVERAL
HOFTER SCHOOL.
>> MY SCHOOL DOESN'T HAVE AN
ENGINEERING PROGRAM AND TO DO
THIS FOR FREE, EVEN IF YOU DON'T
GET CREDIT IT'S STILL VERY GOOD
KNOWLEDGE YOU CAN USE.
>> I'M REALLY LOOKING AT
ENGINEERING FOR COLLEGE IT'S
RIGHT AROUND THE CORNER AND THIS
CLASS IS SUPPOSED TO GIVE YOU A
LOOK AT WHAT ENGINEERING IS
SUPPOSED TO BE LIKE.
>> Reporter: THE LESSONS RANGE
FROM THE BASIC, LIKE HOW A
CANDLE STAYS LIT.
>> YOU HAVE YOUR IGNITION AND
THAT KIND OF MELTS THE WAX AND
THEN THE WICK ABSORBS THE WAX
AND THAT MELTED WAX IT
EVAPORATES AND THAT'S WHAT'S
BURNING THAT EVAPORATED WICK,
ITS CALLED FUEL VAPOR AND THAT
CONSTANTLY BURNS UNTIL YOU PUT
IT OUT.
>> Reporter: TO THE MORE
COMPLEX: INCLUDING FIRE
TORNADOES.
ERIN STEWARTSON WANTED TO LEARN
MORE ABOUT THEM, SO SHE AND
LEVENTON CREATED ONE IN THE LAB.
>> SO A FIRE TORNADO IS
BASICALLY A NORMAL FIRE PLUME.
BASICALLY JUST SOMETHING LIT ON
FIRE AND THEN WHEN AN ENCLOSURE
GOES OVER IT A RECTANGULAR
ENCLOSURE, IT CREATES AN ANGULAR
MOMENTUM WHICH MAKES THE FIRE
SPIN INTO A TORNADO OR A WHIRL.
AND THEY DO EXACTLY WHAT
TORNADOES DO, THEY PICK TREES UP
AND TAKE TREES OUT OF PLACES,
THEY'VE TAKEN FIREMEN OUT OF
PLACES  WHICH IS PRETTY CRAZY.
JUST SEEING HOW IT FORMS AND
WATCHING IT HAPPEN IN THE LAB
THAT WAS PRETTY AMAZING.
>> Reporter: THE CLASS IS
STRUCTURED JUST LIKE A
UNIVERSITY LEVEL SCIENCE COURSE,
WITH SIMILAR EXPECTATIONS AND
COURSEWORK LIKE LABS AND TESTS.
HERE, THOUGH, THE FINAL PROJECT
IS PRESENTED TO CLASSMATES AND
PARENTS.
>> SO IT'S NOT JUST STUDY
SOMETHING, MEASURE SOMETHING AND
PRESENT IT BUT REALLY LEARN
ABOUT WHAT'S HAPPENING IN THE
FIELD AND WHAT ARE PEOPLE DOING
AND WHY DOES THAT MATTER.
>> Reporter: THE INTRODUCTION TO
WHAT COLLEGE CLASSES WILL BE
LIKE, AND DISCUSSION OF
POTENTIAL CAREERS ARE TWO
REASONS PABLO'S MOTHER, NORMA
RUIZ, IS GLAD HER SON SIGNED UP.
>> I THINK THERE SHOULD BE MORE
OF THESE OPPORTUNITIES FOR HIGH
SCHOOL STUDENTS ESPECIALLY THE
ONES INTERESTED IN ENGINEERING
AND THE SCIENCES SO THEY CAN
HAVE A BETTER IDEA OF WHAT THEY
WANT BEFORE THEY GET TO COLLEGE.
THERE'S NOTHING BETTER THAN
GETTING TO COLLEGE KNOWING WHAT
YOU WANT.
>> Reporter: BACK IN THE LAB,
STUDENTS CONTINUE TO GATHER
DATA.
THIS TIME FROM A TREE THAT'S
BEEN SOAKING IN WATER FOR TWO
WEEKS.
IT TAKES NEARLY FIVE MINUTES FOR
IT TO CATCH FIRE, COMPARED TO
THE DRIER TREE WHICH WAS ALMOST
FULLY CONSUMED IN LESS THAN A
MINUTE.
>> IT'S VALUABLE TO SEE HOW THE
FIRE IS GOING TO BEHAVE AND KNOW
WHAT THAT'S GOING TO FEEL LIKE
SO WE GET THAT OUT OF OUR TESTS.
I WROTE A NUMBER FOR WHAT SIZE
FIRE IT IS AND KNOWING OK AN 800
KILOWATT FIRE THAT MEANS TREE IS
BURNING 14 FEET UP INTO THE
CEILING AND I CAN FEEL IT FROM
30 FEET AWAY THAT'S JUST
INVALUABLE EXPERIENCE.
>> Reporter: AND EVEN THOUGH
LEVENTON IS EXPECTED TO GET HIS
Ph.D. VERY SOON, THE DEPARTMENT
HOPES TO FIND SOMEONE WHO CAN
CONTINUE THE CLASS.
A GRANT TO FUND IT NEXT YEAR HAS
ALREADY BEEN APPROVED BY THEIREN
ENGINEERS.
I'M APRIL BROWN IN COLLEGE PARK,
MARYLAND FOR THE PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Ifill: TEN YEARS AGO THIS
WEEK, A DEVASTATING TSUNAMI
SLAMMED SOUTHEAST ASIA, KILLING
NEARLY A QUARTER MILLION PEOPLE
IN 14 COUNTRIES.
TONIGHT, IN AN ENCORE
PRESENTATION, WE TAKE A LOOK AT
THE REMARKABLE RECOVERY OF ONE
COMMUNITY IN INDONESIA THAT WAS
NEARLY WIPED OUT BY THE NATURAL
DISASTER.
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
KIRA KAY HAS THAT STORY.
>> Rerterpo: ON A SUNDAY
MORNING, THE VILLAGERS OF
LAMPUUK GATHER FOR A FEAST,
CELEBRATING THE START OF THE
HARVEST SEASON.
BUT LAMPUUK IS ALSO CELEBRATING
THE LIFE THAT HAS RETURNED TO
IT, A DECADE AFTER A WALL OF
WATER SWEPT THE VILLAGE AWAY.
MISRAN YUSUF IS THE VILLAGE'S
IMAM.
HE RECALLS A SCENE EERILY LIKE
THIS ONE ON DEC 26, 2004.
>> ( translated ): THERE WAS A
WEDDING THAT DAY.
WE WERE PREPARING FOOD AND ALL
OF A SUDDEN AN EARTHQUAKE HIT.
IT WAS SO STRONG PEOPLE FELL.
WE HAD NO IDEA THAT THE SEA
WATER WOULD RISE, WE HAD NEVER
HEARD OF A TSUNAMI.
>> Reporter: THE QUAKE THAT HIT
OFFSHORE WAS A 9.1 ON THE
MAGNITUDE SCALE.
WITHIN 20 MINUTES, WAVES 60 FEET
HIGH HIT THE REGION AT HUNDREDS
OF MILES PER HOUR.
>> ( translated ): IT SOUNDED
LIKE THUNDER.
I HELD MY BREATH AND THE WME OV.
WHEN I SURFACED I SAW PEOPLE
CLINGING TO A TREE TRUNK.
THEY PULLED ME ON BOARD AND WE
FLOATED UNTIL WE REACHED THE
NEXT VILLAGE.
>> Reporter: 130,000 PEOPLE DIED
AND WHOLE COMMUNITIES VANISHED.
LAMPUUK'S LONE STANDING MOSQUE
BECAME AN ICONIC IMAGE OF THE
DISASTER.
TEN YEARS LATER IT IS HARD TO
PICTURE THAT DESTRUCTION ON THE
STREETS OF THE CAPITAL CITY,
BANDA ACEH.
THE ONCE SHATTERED DOWNTOWN IS
NOW FIRMLY BACK IN BUSINESS.
THE RIVERSIDE, CHOKED WITH
DEBRIS, IS A THRIVING WATERFRONT
AGAIN.
PEOPLE OVERALL SEEM HAPPY.
THE TSUNAMI HAD CARVED A NEW
SHORELINE, DISAPPEARING WHOLE
BLOCKS OF THE COMMUNITY OF ULEE
LEE.
BUT NOW IT IS A FAVORITE BEACH
DESTINATION FOR MILIFAES, ONLY
SMALL HINTS REMAIN OF WHAT
HAPPENED HERE.
MAYOR ILLIZA SA'ADUDDIN SAYS THE
REGION HAS BUILT BACK BETTER.
>> ( translated ): THE ECONOMY
HAS IMPROVED, OUR POVERTY LEVEL
HAS DECREASED TO A RATE THAT IS
BELOW THE NATIONAL AVERAGE.
OUR INFRASTRUCTURE IS BETTER
THAN EVEN BEFORE THE TSUNAMI,
ROADS ARE NOW REACHING REMOTE
VILLAGES.
THERE ARE A LOT OF LESSONS THAT
ACEH CAN SHARE ABOUT HOW WE GOT
BACK ON OUR FEET AND HOW WE WERE
ABLE TO COOPERATE WITH MANY
INSTITUTIONS.
>> Reporter: THE INTERNATIONAL
DISASTER RESPONSE WAS A MASSIVE
$7 BILLION IN AID AND
RECONSTRUCTION.
WHILE NOT ENTIRELY CORRUPTION
FREE, THE PROCESS WAS OVERALL
TRANSPARENT AND RESPONSIVE TO
ACTUAL NEED.
THE BIGGEST CHALLENGE WAS TO
PROVIDE HOUSING FOR HALF A
MILLION NEWLY HOMELESS.
BUT TEN YEARS ON, NEARLY
EVERYONE WHO NEEDED A PERMANENT
HOME HAS GOTTEN ONE.
>> ( translated ): THE TSUNAMI
FEELS LIKE IT WAS ONLY A MONTH
AGO.
BUT THANK GOODNESS, WE HAVE
REBUILT OUR LIVES.
>> Reporter: MURNI AND SAKINAH
BOTH LIVED IN ULEE LHEUE AND
MANAGED TO OUTRUN THE WAVES.
AFTER LIVING IN A DISPLACEMENT
CAMP, THEY WERE GIVEN HOUSES IN
A SPRAWLING COMMUNITY
OVERLOOKING BANDA ACEH, KNOWN AS
JACKIE CHAN HILL-- THE ACTION
STAR HELPED FUND THE
CONSTRUCTION.
>> ( translated ): WE'D PREFER
TO STAY HERE, RATHER THAN IN
ULEE LHEUE WHERE IT'S SO CLOSE
TO THE SEA.
I GET FRIGHTENED EVEN WHERE'S
WIND LIKE THIS, LET ALONE AN
EARTHQUAKE.
>> Reporter: IN LAAMPUUK, 800 OF
THE 1,000 RESIDENTS DIED, BUT
SURVIVORS CHOSE TO RETURN TO
THEIR ANCESTRAL LAND.
AND THEY NOW HAVE AN ACTION
PLAN.
>> ( translated ): IF A QUAKE IS
STRONG, WE RUSH TO THE NEARBY
HILL.
WE ALSO HAVE PEOPLE ON LOOKOUT
BY THE SEA, IF THE LEVEL CHANGES
THEY WILL RUSH HERE AND ALERT
US.
I'M SO GRATEFUL FOR THE HELP
FROM OTHER COUNTRIES.
A LOT OF COUNTRIES CAME, EVEN
GEORGE BUSH AND BILL CLINTON
CAME TO MY VILLAGE!
>> Reporter: ACEH'S GRATITUDE TO
THE WORLD IS CLEAR.
BANDA ACEH'S CENTRAL PARK HAS
BEEN TURNED INTO A MONUMENT OF
THANKS, EACH DONOR COUNTRY
ACKNOWELDGED INDIVIDUALLY.
A WORLD CLASS MUSEUM TO THE
TSUNAMI IS A HUGE WEEKEND DRAW,
MOST OF THE VISITORS ARE
ACEHNESE, MANY TOO YOUNG TO
REMEMBER WHAT HAPPENED HERE.
THE WALLS DESCRIBE IN DETAIL THE
GLOBAL RESPONSE, AND THERE ARE
DISPLAYS TEACHING THE SCIENCE AT
THE ROOT OF THE DISASTER.
AND NEARBY, A STARTLING SITE, A
MASSIVE ELECTRICITY BARGE THAT
WAS CARRIED THREE MILES INLAND
BY A WAVE AND DROPPED IN THE
MIDDLE OF A NEIGHBORHOOD.
AUTHORITIES DECIDED TO LEAVE IT
IN PLACE.
LINA HERLENA IS A CERTIFIED
TOURGUIDE.
>> IT SHOWS OUR STRENGTH.
IT SHOWS OUR STRENGTH THAT AFTER
THE TSUNAMI OUR LIVES HAVE NOT
STOPPED.
OUR LIVES HAVE NOT ENDED.
IT ALSO TEACHES OUR GENERATION
LESSONS FROM WHAT HAPPENED IN
THE TSUNAMI.
>> Reporter: THESE LESSONS
EXTEND TO NEW EMERGENCY RESPONSE
PROCEDURES, IMPLEMENTED BY THE
CITY'S TSUNAMI CENTER.
DR. ELLA MEILIANDA MANAGES THE
PROGRAM.
>> THE ROAD IS WIDER NOW. AND
THE COASTAL ROAD HAS BEEN
DESIGNED IN A WAY THAT IT IS
QUITE FAR AWAY FROM THE
COASTLINE.
AND THEN THEY HAVE CLEAR MARKS
OF EVACUATION ROUTES.
>> Reporter: TSUNAMI SIRENS DOT
THE SKYLINE, THEY WARN CITIZENS
WHEN AN EARTHQUAKE OF SEVEN OR
HIGHER IS DETECTED OUT AT SEA.
WHEN THEY SOUND, RESIDENTS
SHOULD MAKE THEIR WAY TO A
VERTICAL EVACUATION SITE-- WATER
RESISTANT HIGH RISES WITH A
HELIPAD PAD ON TOP.
>> WE HAVE 17 JUNIOR HIGH
SCHOOLS UNDER OUR PROGRAM.
AND FOR THESE SCHOOLS, THEY KNOW
WHAT TO DO.
THEY HAVE BUILT THEIR OWN
EVACUATION ROUTE, WHERE THE
MEETING POINT FOR ALL THESE
CHILDREN, AND HOW THE PARENTS
SHOULD PICK THEM UP.
>> Reporter: BUT THE FIRST
ACTIVATION OF THE SYSTEM DIDN'T
GO VERY WELL.
IN 2012, AN 8.6 EARTHQUAKE HIT
THE AREA AND PEOPLE PANICKED,
NOT FOLLOWING EVACUATION
PROCEDURE AND JAMMING THE
STREETS WITH VEHICLES.
MEILIANDA AGREES THAT MORE
PUBLIC TRAINING IS STILL NEEDED,
BUT SAYS THE PSYCHOLOGICAL
LEGACY OF 2004 IS ALSO TO BLAME.
>> SUDDENLY IT HAPPENED AGAIN
AND THEY GOT REALLY TRAUMATIZED
AND DID NOT KNOW WHAT TO DO,
IT'S JUST LIKE A BLANK.
WHAT WE HAVE LEARNED ALSO
THROUGHOUT ALMOST TEN YEARS NOW,
IS THAT THE RECOVERY IS MORE
TOWARD THE PHYSICAL RECOVERY,
RECONSTRUCTION, BUT NOT REALLY
ON THE TRAUMA HEALING ITSELF.
IT STILL NEEDS TO BE DONE IN A
MORE SUSTAINABLE WAY.
>> Reporter: TOUR GUIDE LINA IS
ALSO A SURVIVOR.
SHE FINDS A FORM OF THERAPY
THROUGH HER WORK.
>> AT THE BEGINNING OF WORKING
HERE I FELT LIKE IT WAS VERY
HARD TO TALK TO OTHER PEOPLE, TO
ANSWER THE SAME QUESTIONS ABOUT
WHAT HAPPENED TO ME AT THE TIME.
I FEEL LIKE I EXPERIENCED
FLASHBACKS.
BUT AS TIME GOES ON, IT REALLY
HELPS ME TO RECOVER FROM THE
TRAUMA.
>> Reporter: PERHAPS MOST
STARTLING IN ACEH'S STORY OF
RECOVERY IS THE PERSPECTIVE
ACEHNESE SHARE: THAT THE
TSUNAMI, FOR ALL ITS
DESTRUCTION, ALSO HAD A SILVER
LINING.
IT ENDED 30 YEARS OF CIVIL WAR
THAT HAD ALREADY RN ATOPART
SOCIETY, LEAVING THOUSANDS DEAD
AND MANY PEOPLE TORTURED BY THE
OCCUPYING INDONESIAN MILITARY.
>> IT WAS KIND OF LIKE ALMOST
ENDLESS.
I MEAN, WE NEVER THOUGHT THAT IT
WOULD END AT SOME POINT.
BUT BECAUSE OF THE TSUNAMI, THEN
EVERYBODY STOPPED TO THINK, 'OK,
WE HAVE TO STOP THIS CONFLICT.'
SO THIS IS REALLY LIKE A
BLESSING IN DISGUISE FOR THE
ACEHNESE COMMUNITY.
>> Reporter: WITHIN MONTHS OF
THE TSUNAMI, THE INDONESIAN
GOVERNMENT AND SEPARATIST REBELS
SIGNED A PEACE DEAL.
THE PRESENCE OF AID
ORGANIZATIONS AT E TITHME KEPT
ACEH OPEN TO THE WORLD AND
ENSURED THE PEACE WOULD HOLD.
ON A BEACH THAT TEN YEARS AGO
WAS LITTERED WITH THE DEBRIS OF
PEOPLE'S LIVES, THE PALM TREES
SHEARED OFF AT THE STUMP,
ACEHNESE FAMILIES TODAY ARE
ENJOYING A FEELING OF NORMALITY
FOR THE FIRST TIME IN DECADES.
FREE FROM WAR, MORE PREPARED FOR
DISASTER IF IT COMES AGAIN, AND
GRATEFUL FOR THE TIME THEY HAVE
NOW.
>> Ifill: THAT PIECE WAS
PRODUCED IN PARTNERSHIP WITH THE
BUREAU FOR INTERNATIONAL
REPORTING.
ONLINE, AT pbs.org/newshour, WE
HAVE A LOOK AT HOW TSUNAMI
WARNING SYSTEMS HAVE ADVANCED
SINCE THE 2004 INDIAN OCEAN
DISASTER.
>> Ifill: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
A JORDANIAN WARPLANE WENT DOWN
IN SYRIA, AND ISLAMIC STATE
MILITANTS CAPTURED THE PILOT.
HE'S THE FIRST MEMBER OF THE
U.S.-LED COALITION TO FALL INTO
THEIR HANDS.
AND CHRISTMAS BEGAN ARRIVING
AROUND THE WORLD, WITH MIDNIGHT
MASS SERVICES IN BETHLEHEM AND
AT THE VATICAN.
ON THE NEWSHOUR ONLINE RIGHT
NOW, "DOWNTON ABBEY" TAKES
ITSELF A LITTLE LESS SERIOUSLY.
THE CAST OFFERS UP A CHRISTMAS
SPOOF OF THE BRITISH MELODRAMA
FOR CHARITY. WATCH TO SEE WHO
MAKES LADY GRANTHAM FAINT.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, pbs.org/newshour.
AND THAT'S THE NEWSHOUR FOR
TONIGHT ON THIS CHRISTMAS EVE.
ON CHRISTMAS DAY, TOMORROW, IF
PRISON IS A TIME TO PAY A DEBT
TO SOCIETY, WHEN DOES THAT
PAYMENT END?
WE WILL LOOK AT A MOVEMENT THAT
IS TRYING TO HELP FELONS GET ON
WITH THEIR LIVES, AND THEIR
CAREERS.
I'M GWEN IFILL, WE'LL SEE YOU
ON-LINE, AND AGAIN HERE TOMORROW
EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOURTHAN, K YOU, AND HAVE A
VERY MERRY CHRISTMAS.